# Unsupervised learning and clustering algorithms

This project is devoted to the comparative analysis of data clustering algorithms. Specifically, we will discuss algorithms such as k-means, k-medoids, DBSCAN, and hierarchical clustering methods for various similarity measures (e.g., Ward's criterion or single linkage), as well as the *Genie* hierarchical algorithm from the **genieclust** package (https://genieclust.gagolewski.com/index.html#python-version).

The discussion will be divided into several areas related to cluster analysis. Some of these will be based on selecting the appropriate number of clusters for the considered datasets by analyzing the dependencies of various metrics, such as the Silhouette score on the selected number of clusters and dendrograms generated using hierarchical methods. Furthermore, the sensitivity of algorithms to data scaling and outliers will be examined. Furthermore, methods for assessing clustering quality using various metrics will be discussed. This project will also include applications of cluster analysis results in real-world data mining. Clustering will be examined for its ability to create new partition classes and their interpretability. The possibility of using segmentation results as new explanatory variables will also be examined, as will the approach of building separate predictive models for each cluster.

The repository contains the following files/folders.
- The *cluster_master* folder contains one file of the same name with the .py extension, which contains the Python implementation of the above-mentioned metrics.
- The *Code* folder contains two files with the .ipynb extension:
- The *Kod_klasteryzacja.ipynb* notebook, which contains the Python implementations of the experiments described in Checkpoint, excluding the part concerning support for supervised learning.
- The *Kod_klasteryzacja_nadz.ipynb* notebook, which contains the Python implementations of the experiments concerning support for supervised learning.
- The *Data* folder contains 14 files with the .gz extension describing 7 synthetic datasets from the *clustbench* package (each dataset described by observation coordinates and their associated labels) and two files with the .csv extension containing real-world data on goalkeepers and social media users.
-  Markdown file CHECKPOINT.md, which contains an extended description of the project, including a breakdown of individual experiments.
- *Prezentacja_klasteyzacja.pdf* containing a short summary of the project in the form of a 15-minute presentation.
- *Raport_klasteryzacja.pdf* containing a 57-page report on all experiments performed in the project, along with the results and conclusions.

In this project, we considered all the problems described in Checkpoint. We used 11 synthetic datasets (including 7 from the *clustbench* package) and 5 datasets containing real data. The problem of selecting the appropriate number of clusters was considered for all 11 synthetic datasets and for all algorithms used except DBSCAN. The behavior of all the mentioned metrics (except NCA) was checked for varying numbers of clusters and, where possible, the behavior of the dendrogram was analyzed. Furthermore, all results and partitions were visualized. The problem of unscaled data and outliers was considered for all 11 synthetic datasets and for all algorithms used. The values ​​of all metrics (except NCA) and execution times were examined for both the original datasets and the scaled data. The results were then aggregated by clustering by algorithm type (separately for scaled and unscaled data). The average for each metric and execution time was then calculated. For outliers, approximately 5% of the outliers were added to the original datasets. The values ​​of all metrics (except NCA) and the execution time for each algorithm were calculated. The results were aggregated by grouping by algorithm type (separately for data with and without outliers), and then the average for each metric and execution time was calculated. A comparative analysis of the algorithms was also performed on all 11 synthetic datasets. All the mentioned algorithms and metrics were tested for the optimal, pre-defined number of clusters. Furthermore, the algorithms' execution time was also examined. Experiments on real data consisted of searching for new partition classes determined using clusters obtained through clustering and their interpretability on real datasets. These experiments were conducted on two real datasets located in the *Data* folder. Furthermore, a study of the use of segmentation results as new explanatory variables was conducted on three real datasets from the *OpenML* website. The improvement in classification was tested on the test set using the *balanced accuracy* metric.

All obtained results are fully reproducible. To replicate all results, download the files contained in the *codes* folder. They use functions implemented in the *cluster_master* file, so it should be downloaded before executing the code. Furthermore, to execute *Kod_klasteryzacja.ipynb*, you will need files containing the datasets from the *Data* folder. The notebook is divided into sections, so you can only perform some of the experiments, but you must first import all the necessary libraries and download all the data.
